Blog post about Keccak bug (#128)
ethereum/solidity-blog: _posts/2021-03-23-keccak-optimizer-bug.md

---
layout: post
published: true
title:  "Solidity Keccak Caching Bug"

> date:   2021-03-22

Author: I'll update the date tomorrow. Otherwise, the post won't show up in netlify deploy.

author: Solidity Team
category: Security Alerts
---

> On March 20, 2021, a bug in Solidity's bytecode optimizer was found by differentially fuzzing . The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On March 20, 2021, a bug in Solidity's bytecode optimizer was found by differential fuzzing . The
```

is fixed with [version 0.8.3](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.3) released on
March 23, 2021. **The bug is present in all prior versions of Solidity.**

We assigned the bug a severity level of "medium".

## Technical Details

**Summary**: The bytecode optimizer incorrectly re-used previously evaluated Keccak-256 hashes. You
are unlikely to be affected if you do not compute Keccak-256 hashes in inline assembly.

Solidity's bytecode optimizer has a step that can compute Keccak-256 hashes, if the contents of the
memory, over which the Keccak-256 built-in function is invoked, are known during compilation time.
This step also has a mechanism to determine that two Keccak-256 hashes are equal even if the values

> in memory are not known during compile time. This mechanism had a bug where, the Keccak-256 hash of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in memory are not known during compile time. This step had a bug where, the Keccak-256 hash of
```

cases where the hashes cannot be computed at compile time, yet the optimizer considered them equal
and thus modified the semantics:

```solidity
contract C {
  function bug(string memory s) public returns (bool ret) {
    assembly {
      let a := keccak256(s, 32)
      let b := keccak256(s, 8)
      // Here `a` and `b` were considered equal,
      // leading to `ret` being incorrectly set to true.
      ret := eq(a, b)
    }
  }
}
```

```solidity
contract C {
  function bug() public view returns (bool ret) {
    assembly {
      let x := calldataload(0)
      mstore(0, x)
      mstore(0x20, x)
      let a := keccak256(0, 4)
      // even though the memory location is different,
      // the 32-byte content is the same.
      let b := keccak256(0x20, 8)
      // Here `a` and `b` were considered equal,
      // leading to `ret` being incorrectly set to true.
      ret := eq(a, b)
    }
  }
}
```

Specifically, `keccak256(mpos1, length1)` and `keccak256(mpos2, length2)` in some cases were
considered equal if `length1` and `length2`, when rounded up to nearest multiple of 32 were the
same, and when the memory contents at `mpos1` and `mpos2` can be deduced to be equal.

> You maybe **affected** if you compute multiple Keccak-256 hashes of the same content, but with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may be **affected** if you compute multiple Keccak-256 hashes of the same content, but with
```

Author: I'll fix the `maybe`. But isn't `same content` more accurate?

Reviewer: > But isn't same content more accurate?

You are right, it also feels less heavy.

> different length inside inline assembly, and enabled the optimizer. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
different lengths inside inline assembly, and enabled the optimizer. 
```

### Unaffected Cases

You are unaffected in the following situations:

- If your code uses `keccak256` with a length that is not known at compile time.

> - If your code only uses `keccak256` with length that is always a multiple of 32. In particular, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If your code only uses `keccak256` with a length that is always a multiple of 32. In particular, the
```

>   Solidity compiler always uses multiples of 32 for storage slot computation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Solidity compiler always uses a Keccak-256 hash over memory regions whose lengths are multiples of 32 for storage slot computation.
```

Author: Added this with slight rewording

- If pairs of `keccak256` hashes are separated by certain instructions such as:

  - An instruction that breaks the control flow, e.g., `jumpi`, `jump` etc. In high level code, this
     would be function calls, if statements, loops, etc.

>   - An instruction that writes to memory other than `mstore`, e.g., `call`, `returndatacopy`, etc..

Reviewer: Interesting! I thought `mstore` would invalidate the cache.

Author: `mstore` to a location that can be proven to be seperated by `32` does not invalidate `memory` or `keccak` cache:

```
			  let a := keccak256(0, 32)
			  mstore(64, 100)
			  let b := keccak256(0, 32)
			  ret := eq(a, b)
```

Reviewer: Ah I see! Perhaps reword it as `invocations of mstore that certainly to a different memory location`? Because the current wording gives the impression that mstore to the same location also does not invalidate the cache. May be a reader should pay more attention here, but at least I didn't :-)

### Severity

> Since most usages of `keccak256` falls under one of the unaffected cases mentioned in the previous

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since most usages of `keccak256` fall under one of the unaffected cases mentioned in the previous
```

> section, we assigned the bug a severity level "medium".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
section, we assigned the bug a "medium" severity level.
```

### Fuzzing

The bug was discovered by differentially testing the current code-generation and the upcoming Yul
based code-generation with fuzzer generated input. Essentially, the example in

> [solidity#11132](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/issues/11131) produced different results, when

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[solidity#11131](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/issues/11131) produced different results, when
```

> compiled using different code-generation paths; this is because the bytecode optimizer is only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
compiled using different code-generation paths; this is because the bytecode optimizer, in which the bug was present, is only
```

> activated in the old code-generation, and the Yul based codegen has a more powerful Yul-optimizer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
activated in the old code-generation, while the Yul based codegen uses the Yul-optimizer that does not contain the bug.
```

Author: I added it with a small rewording. There is a PR by @axic to enable bytecode optimizer in the Yul codegen.

> This bug discovery was part of ongoing Fuzzing related work. You can read more about Solidity's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This bug discovery is part of ongoing Fuzzing related work. You can read more about Solidity's
```

approach to fuzzing in one of the older [blog

> post.](https://blog.soliditylang.org/2021/02/10/an-introduction-to-soliditys-fuzz-testing-approach/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
posts.](https://blog.soliditylang.org/2021/02/10/an-introduction-to-soliditys-fuzz-testing-approach/)
```

---
layout: post
published: true

> title:  "Solidity Keccak Caching Bug"

Reviewer 2: Maybe add the word "optimizer" somewhere?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
title:  "Solidity Optimizer Keccak Caching Bug"
```

like this?

Author: @franzihei the suggestion was added.

date:   2021-03-22
author: Solidity Team
category: Security Alerts
---

On March 20, 2021, a bug in Solidity's bytecode optimizer was found by differential fuzzing. The bug
is fixed with [version 0.8.3](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.3) released on
March 23, 2021. **The bug is present in all prior versions of Solidity.**

We assigned the bug a severity level of "medium".

## Technical Details

**Summary**: The bytecode optimizer incorrectly re-used previously evaluated Keccak-256 hashes. You
are unlikely to be affected if you do not compute Keccak-256 hashes in inline assembly.

Solidity's bytecode optimizer has a step that can compute Keccak-256 hashes, if the contents of the
memory, over which the Keccak-256 built-in function is invoked, are known during compilation time.
This step also has a mechanism to determine that two Keccak-256 hashes are equal even if the values

> in memory are not known during compile time. This step had a bug where, the Keccak-256 hash of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in memory are not known during compile time. This step had a bug where the Keccak-256 hash of the
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
in memory are not known during compile time. This step had a bug where Keccak-256 hashes of the
```

Aren't it multiple hashes?

same memory content, but of different sizes were considered equal. The following is a simple example
that illustrates the bug:

```solidity
contract C {
  function bug() public returns (uint a, uint b) {
    assembly {
      mstore(0, 0)
      // The optimizer computes the value at compile time:
      // 0x290decd9548b62a8d60345a988386fc84ba6bc95484008f6362f93160ef3e563
      a := keccak256(0, 32)

>       // The optimizer incorrectly uses the cached value
>       // 0x290decd9548b62a8d60345a988386fc84ba6bc95484008f6362f93160ef3e563
>       // instead of 
>       // 0xe2b9f9f9430b05bfa9a3abd3bac9a181434d23a707ef1cde8bd25d30203538d8
>       b := keccak256(0, 23)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      // The optimizer incorrectly uses the cached value
      // 0x290decd9548b62a8d60345a988386fc84ba6bc95484008f6362f93160ef3e563
      // and transforms the next line to
      // b := 0x290decd9548b62a8d60345a988386fc84ba6bc95484008f6362f93160ef3e563
      // instead of 
      // b := 0xe2b9f9f9430b05bfa9a3abd3bac9a181434d23a707ef1cde8bd25d30203538d8
      b := keccak256(0, 23)
```

    assembly {
      let a := keccak256(s, 32)
      let b := keccak256(s, 8)
      // Here `a` and `b` were considered equal,
      // leading to `ret` being incorrectly set to true.
      ret := eq(a, b)
    }
  }
}
```

```solidity
contract C {
  function bug() public view returns (bool ret) {
    assembly {
      let x := calldataload(0)
      mstore(0, x)
      mstore(0x20, x)
      let a := keccak256(0, 4)
      // even though the memory location is different,
      // the 32-byte content is the same.
      let b := keccak256(0x20, 8)
      // Here `a` and `b` were considered equal,
      // leading to `ret` being incorrectly set to true.
      ret := eq(a, b)
    }
  }
}
```

Specifically, `keccak256(mpos1, length1)` and `keccak256(mpos2, length2)` in some cases were
considered equal if `length1` and `length2`, when rounded up to nearest multiple of 32 were the
same, and when the memory contents at `mpos1` and `mpos2` can be deduced to be equal.

You may be **affected** if you compute multiple Keccak-256 hashes of the same content, but with
different lengths inside inline assembly, and enabled the optimizer.

### Unaffected Cases

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe also add (could also put it further down or in a different section):

Apart from the keccak256 function, the compiler internally generates code that makes use of the keccak256 instruction in the following cases:
 - for indexed event arguments
 - for the function `abi.encodeWithSignature`
 - when using string or bytes keys in mappings
 - for accessing the data location of mappings and arrays

Author: Added

> You are unaffected in the following situations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You are unaffected if your code:
```

> - If your code uses `keccak256` with a length that is not known at compile time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Uses `keccak256` with a length that is not known at compile time.
```

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't start an incomplete sentence with a capitalized word :)

> - If your code only uses `keccak256` with a length that is always a multiple of 32. In particular,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Only uses `keccak256` with a length that is always a multiple of 32. In particular,
```

  for storage slot computation, the Solidity compiler always computes Keccak-256 hash over memory
  regions whose lengths and offsets are multiples of 32.

> - If pairs of `keccak256` hashes are separated by certain instructions such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Contains pairs of `keccak256` hashes that are separated by certain instructions such as:
```

  - An instruction that breaks the control flow, e.g., `jumpi`, `jump` etc. In high level code, this
     would be function calls, if statements, loops, etc.
  - An instruction that writes to memory other than `mstore`, e.g., `call`, `returndatacopy`, etc.

### Severity

Since most usages of `keccak256` fall under one of the unaffected cases mentioned in the previous
section, we assigned the bug a "medium" severity level.

> 

Reviewer 2: Especially the fact that this can only affect sequences of opcodes without jumps and calls, the likelihood of the bug being present in existing code is very low. This is also validated by the fact that the bug has been present in the optimizer for so long without being detected.

Author: Added this.

### Fuzzing

The bug was discovered by differentially testing the current code-generation and the upcoming Yul
based code-generation with fuzzer generated input. Essentially, the example in
[solidity#11131](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/issues/11131) produced different results, when
compiled using different code-generation paths; this is because the bytecode optimizer, in which the
bug was present, is only activated in the old code-generation, and the Yul based codegen currently
only uses the Yul-optimizer that does not contain this bug.

> This bug discovery is part of ongoing Fuzzing related work. You can read more about Solidity's

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This bug discovery is part of ongoing fuzzing related work. You can read more about Solidity's
```

> approach to fuzzing in one of the older [blog

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
approach to fuzzing in this introduction [blog
```

Author: I reworded this.

---
layout: post
published: true
title:  "Solidity Keccak Caching bug"
date:   2021-03-23
author: Solidity Team
category: Security Alerts
---

On March 20, 2021, a bug in Solidity's bytecode optimizer was found. The bug is fixed with [version
0.8.3](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.3) released on March 23, 2021. **The
bug is present in all prior versions of Solidity.**

We assigned the bug a severity level of "medium".

## Technical Details of the Bug

**Summary**: The bytecode optimizer incorrectly re-used previously evaluated Keccak-256 hashes. You
are unlikely to be affected if you do not compute Keccak-256 hashes in inline assembly.

Solidity's bytecode optimizer has a step that can compute Keccak-256 hashes, if the contents of the

> memory are known during compilation time. This step also has a mechanism to determine that two

Reviewer: ```suggestion
memory over which the Keccak-256 built-in function is invoked are known during compilation time. This step also has a mechanism to determine that two
```

Keccak-256 hashes are equal even if the values in memory are not known during compile time. This

> mechanism had a bug where, Keccak-256 of the same memory content, but different sizes were

Reviewer: To be sure, the bug is in the mechanism which infers keccak equality by memory location only. This mechanism is used in two scenarios, right?
  - When memory content is compile time constant and identical across two keccak calls
  - When memory content is not compile-time constant but identical across two keccak calls

The wording of the sentence gives the impression that the bug is only in scenario (2)

Author: Hopefully the new updated example would avoid this confusion.

> mechanism had a bug where, Keccak-256 of the same memory content, but different sizes were
> considered equal. The following is a example that illustrates the bug:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
mechanism had a bug where the Keccak-256 hash of the same memory content, but of different sizes were
considered equal. The following is a example that illustrates the bug:
```

```solidity
contract C {
  uint[] data;

>   function bug() public{

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  function bug() public {
```

    assembly {
      // Sets data.length = 2
      sstore(0, 2)
      mstore(0, 0)
      // data[0] = 234
      sstore(keccak256(0, 32), 234)
      // A bug in the caching mechanism previously caused keccak256(0, 23) to be the same as
      // keccak256(0, 32), leading to data[1] == 123` being true.

>       sstore(add(keccak256(0, 23), 1), 123)

Reviewer 2: I think this is a bit distracting - shouldn't we focus on a simple example that just shows exactly the bug - especially as the first example?

Reviewer: I think for better readability it is good to draw attention to an example where memory contents are not known at compile-time but are considered equal due to the bug. So perhaps the `string` example where the keccak input is a function parameter?

Author: I changed this example to a much simpler one.

    }
  }
}
```

In the above example, both the Keccak-256 hashes can be computed at compile time. Here are two other

> cases where the hashes cannot be computed at compile time, yet assuming equality breaks the
> semantics:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
cases where the hashes cannot be computed at compile time, yet the optimizer considered them equal and thus modified the semantics:
```

  function bug(string memory s) public returns (bool ret) {
    assembly {
      let a := keccak256(s, 32)
      let b := keccak256(s, 8)
      // Here `a` and `b` were considered equal,
      // leading to `ret` being incorrectly set to true.
      ret := eq(a, b)
    }
  }
}
```

```solidity
contract C {
  function bug() public view returns (bool ret) {
    assembly {
      let x := calldataload(0)
      mstore(0, x)
      mstore(0x20, x)
      let a := keccak256(0, 4)
      // even though the memory location is different,
      // the 32-byte content is the same.
      let b := keccak256(0x20, 8)
      // Here `a` and `b` were considered equal,
      // leading to `ret` being incorrectly set to true.
      ret := eq(a, b)
    }
  }
}
```

Specifically, ``keccak256(mpos1, length1)`` and ``keccak256(mpos2, length2)`` in some cases were
considered equal if ``length1`` and ``length2``, when rounded up to nearest multiple of 32 were the
same, and when the memory contents at ``mpos1`` and ``mpos2`` can be deduced to be equal.

You maybe affected if you compute multiple Keccak-256 hashes of the same content, but with different
length inside inline assembly, and enabled the optimizer.

> 

Reviewer 2: Please add a section where we list all the cases in which code is unaffected. Please also mention that solidity uses multiples of 32 for storage slot calculation. Oh and we should also mention that the cache is cleared in certain situations and list these situations.

> 

Reviewer 2: We should also add a section that explains how we arrived at the severity classification.
